Good day. Today we have a guest,
e.e. Natalya Kutsul, Doctor of Technical Sciences.
some places at the Olympiads
with people who are engaged in science or the
Olympiads in order to
popularize this
area, let's say, because we usually have
everyone there talking about dancers and
athletes, someone jumped, everyone knows about him,
and science happens somehow in
the background, although everything We keep
there  let's hold the phone, this is the work of
chemists, physicists, programmers, and so on.
Briefly tell us
what your department does, in simple
words for the viewer.
yes  of them of various types and mainly
satellite data, because satellite
monitoring is my field of scientific
activity, my field of interest,
we train students with a specialty in
applied mathematics, and we try to
get a very good background in the field of
mathematics, physics, and computer science,
because these three areas  They are
the basis of modern technologies related
to the processing of satellite data and various
other data. You also need to deeply
understand the physics of the specifics of obtaining this
data. You need to understand the mathematical
methods for processing them for modeling
processes.
applied mathematics is exactly
the specialty that is needed to become a
specialist in satellite intelligence. And
if I'm not mistaken, it seems that it
has been a year or so since there were fires somewhere around the
world. It seems that you had a post about
computer analysis of satellite data from
these
fires.  that I do not understand this at all
I think a lot of viewers are also interested
in space for them, there is some kind of analysis of
satellites, yes, only with the war, we
are watching. Yeah, the Russian
tanks have broken down as far as
what the satellite can see. So, what can we
analyze from this satellite?
Now there are a lot of satellites in the orbit of the
earth, which is
in this year  about 5,000
active satellites. These are the ones that shoot something and
transmit it to the earth. They are very
different. There are satellites that study the
constellations and other planets. I am the satellites that
look at the
earth and study what is happening on the earth.
processes, that is, with the help of satellites,
we can understand how life
on Earth is arranged. Well, there is a whole direction
called earth observation, these are
satellites that directly look at
us at what humanity is doing, and they
are also very different from
military satellites that shoot
very detailed information about what is there
conditionally speaking, you can look at the stars on the epaulettes
d  about satellites Well, they are paid,
they are closed, they are used by state intelligence,
and thank God our state has
access to such data, but we are engaged in the
processing of open satellite data
that is publicly available, and this is data
that has a resolution of 10 meters per
pixel, that is, one point that we can see
on the ground it is 10 by 10 meters, but such
data are received regularly every 5-6 days,
every point of the earth's territory is covered by
such data and this has already been happening since the
15th year from the 14th.
with the
help of these satellites, and here,
since there is a lot of this data, there
is a problem of processing large data of big data
and
machine learning methods are needed, because
you cannot manually analyze
such a volume of data,
I am just now, by the way, this is quite a
popular direction. I look at it
too  training machines are leaving. And how are
you with the selection of personnel, because in order
to go conditionally to some legal so
tr  eba Well, there you have to pass some history with diplomas,
and here you need a person not just to pass, but to
understand physics, and they
direct physics to mathematics, that
is, is there a shortage of such children or is there
interest, how is this because
we can develop any programs,
but  no If there are no people who will
go to them
Yes, you know
until this year, of course, this year is not
indicative until this year we always had a
selection and there were enough students this
year we recruited for the budget for the first year
less than it was possible to recruit due to the war
due to  war Well, this suggests that
we need to improve, we
have also drawn conclusions from this and will
improve our educational program,
we will work better with schoolchildren so that
they know more about us and want to
come to us, I think for sure yes What is the problem here?
because
I know a lot of children,
eleventh-graders, they are the ones who wanted to
go to Kyiv to enter the Shevchenko KPI because of
this military service, they are uncertain or
there  he is worried that later students
will be mobilized, he will not study
, they chose Western universities, and
this year it was massive, that is why I think
that this year is an exception, it cannot
be imposed like that, well, it is our own fault.
always draw
conclusions, learn for every life
situation, but this year we recruited
more students
than we expected for master's degree and much more than we
expected for postgraduate students,
that is, this direction of ours among maybe
tenth graders, they still do not fully
understand what they can
get in that  or another field, they
go to more popular areas such
as computer science or
software engineering, but students
who have already completed their bachelor's degree and think
who they will really be in life and do not
want to be just backhand and front-end
developers, but want to do something
really  cool, they are coming and this
year we had a competition and we scored
more  more people than expected. What I
want to note is that, for example, in graduate school,
this is what I am proud of.
Now, people have come to us, not only those who
graduated from our faculty, but also from
other universities of Ukraine, and a
specialist who already occupies a good top
position in the Samsung company came, and he
I understood that he still needs an education, he still
needs to become a phd and defend himself,
this is the case, yes, you see
that we have the concept of ITishnik for a person, not
initiation, its everyone who is somewhere in this, its
all ITishniks. Yes, but in order to become an
ITishnik and make websites, it takes two
weeks  to go if you conditionally teach a person like this
and he will live this site if you really
make some very cool systems here we
need to say this because we
still
dont have a lot of popularization of this so why do
they go there for that specialty
because someone from acquaintances went older and
they go there, but you can say
that, for example, that with the help of these
satellites, we can, of
course, analyze either from your
examples or  from the examples of my colleagues, for
example, if we take examples,
we and the Scientific Group that analyzes damage
from the war, damage to
agriculture, damage to ecology,
for example, based on satellite data,
we determined that in the war zone
where the Luhansk region is, there is such a
nature reserve protected by UNESCO
called the emerald network, i.e.  There are
forests of very rare species that the whole world knows about,
and this zone is under
protection, that is, the territory that
is on the controlled
Ukrainian territory, it has been preserved,
there were some fellings, but the forest is being
restored and it can be seen that this process is
normal, but the forest that is on the
uncontrolled on the occupied  territory,
it is completely destroyed and the same
in fact throughout the demarcation zone, not
only that in that climatic zone it is steppe,
there are so few forests And they are absolutely
necessary, even for
agriculture, forest strips are needed, but all
this is destroyed because of the war and this can be
observed in the second example too  very
practical thing  which is now in demand,
international agencies provide
assistance to Ukrainian farmers to those farmers who
suffered from the war, but it is necessary to
understand whether this farmer really suffered,
whether his field was in the war zone, whether
he sowed it, or what kind of damage he
has from this. And
thanks to our technologies, this
recognition  that the
recognition of the quality of recognition of
whether this field was damaged by bombs is growing, it
allows you to really assess the real, real
damage that has been received, understand that this is not
just a person sitting and watching,
some computer program makes
its forecast, let's say this field is
damaged, for example, so many percent of the
yield Yes  and the beds there are corn
conditionally, yes,
this is machine learning, that is, first we
train the neural network to recognize what
exactly grows on this territory, and
we have been solving such problems for more than 5 years,
we know what happened in all the fields in
Ukraine and in the occupied territory
in particular and
analyzing the state of vegetation, understanding
what kind of  It should also be based on models,
mathematical models of plant growth,
let's see if this corn is developing
well or badly. For example, it can be seen that
many fields did not grow well this year,
that is, they are developing much worse
, because, well, economically, it
was either impossible or unprofitable, or
it was unclear what to do, that is, this
Our agriculture lost a lot
this year. We are analyzing all of this this year. Previously, we were engaged in more
peaceful affairs, for example, we were building
models of the sustainable development of
agriculture in urban areas.
Grandma is trying to analyze where to properly
develop the city, taking into account the
geographical position, taking into account the
existing infrastructure,
and these are such modern things that
allow us to bring intelligent
models  in our modern life. By the way,
I saw that your graduates or students
compete on the platform like this. On this platform,
you can briefly say that because not everyone
understands what kind of
platform it is.
Ents there
or Schoolchildren who practice in our
circles,
now in general the
concept of open science and open
data is developing in the world and in connection with this, large companies
create such servers on which there is a lot of
data, a lot of data and sites, and interested
people can develop their models and
practice  with these data sets
because artificial intelligence is the science of data,
science that works on data is not just
some formula that you have to
program, but it is a
system that should find patterns
in the available data and give some predictions
or classification
recommendations of some control systems
And here it is  such a Google server, it is such a
large global system that contains
a lot of data and sets, and leading
companies, commercial companies of the world,
create competitions there, that is, they give a
task, give their day and set, and expect
that teams or individual participants will
solve this problem, who can solve it better
If he receives a cash prize, it
can be big prizes, for example
100 thousand  10,000 euros each of
participants there. Tens of thousands of
participants participate, I saw that there are
more than 100,000 experts registered on this platform
in the field of machine learning
and data analysis, and it is obvious that if you
show that you are winning in these
competitions, it is a system similar to kotfors,
for example or  to the eolymps of our
Olympic programming competition system.
Only it applies to
data analysis and machine learning problems, from that the
company will receive an effective solution to
its problem, plus it can
recruit specialists who already know how to
solve this problem. Well, young people are an
opportunity to demonstrate themselves
earn a portfolio so that you will be well
hired later and add it and you show it,
look, I took such and such there, and
this is confirmation that you can work with
those data and others. So
yes, absolutely
absolutely,
I recently saw that you have a circle at the department
so are children schoolchildren I understand
They attend won some Space
Hackathon as  there is a stage, can you explain in
more detail what kind of circle it is, what kind of
hackathon and where they will move next,
this is a very good question.
It concerns how large
innovative companies develop science.
NASA, the National Agency for Atmosphere and
Space, space and atmosphere, the German
Space Agency
holds a hackathon every year, it gives  tasks,
interesting tasks related to processing or
working with satellite data, and these
tasks are those that are currently unsolved,
which are at the forefront of the science
of space data processing,
countries around the world. Usually, more than
100 countries hold such
akathon at the same time on weekends. It usually
happens  for two days and in Ukraine, it is also
held every year, it is held in
different cities in Kyiv, it is regularly
held in the Dnipro sometimes in Odesa,
and
teams gather in order to
solve
the
tasks of
effective processing or analysis of
satellite data this year, set by the American National Space Agency
such  of the tasks was the task of analyzing the impact of
climate on the life of
all people, and here the team of our department, a
team of students who study with us and
attend the circle of applied
mathematics took part in this hackathon
and researched using satellite data
how the list of
agricultural crops that
grow on  fields We may be driving
on the roads and feel that
there were no sunflowers in the north of Ukraine before.
And now the picture in the fields is completely
changing, those crops that
were not grown before are growing, the climatic conditions are changing.
Well, this is
interesting from an ecological point of view, from the point of
view of sustainable development.
the circle
was officially opened only
last month, but not formally. We
have been working with children for many years, and
starting with the Institute of Space
Research, where I worked for a long time, we
tried to attract children and
stimulate their interest in space
activities and science in general, so that they not
only  were losing  to motivate the front end
so that they go to consciously solve some
interesting and important problems, and this year
we opened a circle which de facto has been
working for several years, the head of this
circle is our young employee Anya
Yelimova. Last year she
defended her thesis herself and became a PG Doctor of
Philosophy  under the new system,
she graduated from Kyiv Shevchenko University, and
both our students and schoolchildren take part in the group,
we hold summer schools for them, we hold
some internal competitions, we take part
in such international events, because it
strongly stimulates children if they see that
here on the NASA website you can see that there were 300
teams and here is our project among them and we
won the regional competition and they gave us
$10,000 worth of resources on
the Amazon Web Services platform, he is already
asking not just money, but they
gave resources.  Well, it's
interesting, and because otherwise you don't have such
opportunities, it also develops your
abilities,
like children, for example  the treasure to get into this circle
is some purely at KPI, so if there is a
child, for example, in Kyiv, how
can he join this circle, and is there
any, for example, a child not from Kyiv, so
what are the options to join the space? Yes, you
know, we are in touch  with
covid, which brought a lot of damage, but it also
gave us new opportunities, we are all used to
working remotely, that's why our
group works in a mixed format, some
meetings are held face-to-face at the beginning of the
year, everyone met together to at least
see what the participants look like, they
continue to cooperate online and themselves
this hackathon also took place online, so
anyone can join. In
general, at this hackathon there were teams not
only from one city, but there were collective
teams, some from Kharkiv, some from Kyiv,
some are currently in Poland and
they are members of the same team, so
there is absolutely no  there are no limits, and
interested children can join such a thing.
I
'm not so sure, but I think that there is
an e-mail of this group, there is definitely a
group in Telegram where they communicate and
lead,
discuss everything there, move forward,
discuss all their tasks and
even
because of the fact that our department can write
that I am interested and we will accept  I
just then gave a description under the video and output
When I will edit Yes, I will output These
contacts yes, that is, in order to possibly have
her children, for example, which is interesting
because we have these nuggets Bunch Bunch of them
If we are going to rally, we will rally
in us  there are 10,000 people, among them,
who is interested, and of them 10 will write, and of
them three will come, I will be the only one, then I will become
a scientist or do some cool things
. I think it will be cool.
it is absolutely normal to write,
and yes, in Ukraine you can join, we
try to give it to children not very
systematically, but we try to give
information about some existing
competitions  it is possible to give an idea, give some
background. Because in fact, sometimes it is enough
to learn something very little so that you can already
offer your ideas, this
pushes you to some innovative
projects and you can win,
participate and win in competitions and in
international competitions and in manas,
including, for example, water  entry pie
if there is conditionally capable there from
9-10-11 class yes How much time does he need
in order to at least
just start working with those data
sets there on the map, for example.
there are such training courses
for beginners and there you need to know the
English language, but I listened to your
interview with Bohdan Rublov and he said
that it is very important to know the
English language, it is important to know mathematics.
Well, I think he also mentioned
programming.  I will
also add physics, because if physics is added to these three
sciences, English mathematics, programming
, then you do not just
become open  The door to
computer science is open to you, and the door opens to you
in very
complex areas, in very modern areas
where the competition is not so high and there is an
opportunity to get to the
very top.  graduate school of the
University of Maryland. And this
university is
ranked third in the world for the repair of
sensing. It is a science related to the processing of
satellite data, and it is the first in other rankings.
That is, it is a top university. It is
your road to Olympus, you can say
to the scientific Olympus of space
achievements, and this  the university
works directly with us, directly gives grants to
graduate students, so there is an opportunity to
make your way, it is such a social elevator, you can
say your knowledge of mathematics, physics,
computer science in English, they
open doors for you, well, in fact, the doors to very
cool institutions, this is only talking about space,
and the day before yesterday we had  a meeting with
representatives of a commercial company
engaged in
by developing pharmacological
substances, pharmaceuticals, new substances,
economic analysis of the impact of various viruses,
making viral agents, they also need
mathematics, they need physics, because it is necessary to
model the physical processes of the spread of an
epidemic, and this is actually all
the same, the same mathematical
background is needed in order to
develop science  in completely different
areas, you know, I will say this, I see that in the
last decades, somehow, the
popularity of mathematics education, physics,
it is technical. And in general, it dropped a lot. There
was a period when everyone ran to become lawyers, now
there are not many lawyers, now everyone is
running to become programmers, well, they run without
desire  there to learn the same math there,
so here I am clicking I will already be flashing
sites I am already a programmer I
dont need anything else I am paid in
dollars Yes, we have a lot of people who rushed into
it because of the fact that it is possible to
work remotely and get to live here
and get  salary in dollars and on
this machine is not even quite competent
At that level of salaries, people already
feel comfortable enough. And this is
enough for them not
to move anywhere in life.
the results for yourself are much
more interesting because it is one thing when you
sit
and just do all your life as if this format,
well, that is, it does not require such a
serious qualification. And
the world market is still growing. It
seems to me that it is competition
because  there are also a
lot of Brazilians and they can also become
IT experts anyway, after 10 years there will be enough,
but there are not many cool people
who can be hired for some modern tasks.
there are also opportunities for this specialty abroad or in Ukraine,
where they find, we guide our
graduates that they can go to
science or to the choir  I study science and This science is both
abroad and in Ukraine, but I want to
emphasize that I have worked
in science in Ukraine all my life, but what we did
was always connected with
international partners, it was always
participation in international scientific projects, and
thanks to this, we  preserved both scientific
competitiveness in Ukraine and
financial competitiveness because, unfortunately, in Ukraine,
science is put in such conditions that it
despises itself, and in order for it to
be truly competitive science,
it needs to be within the limits of
international international cooperation, then
you feel like a knowledge  at the level,
you can see what your level is and according to Fin According to the
salary, it is quite possible for this
you need to understand that you need to look for a
partnership, you need to
popularize your achievements so that
these international partners know about you, you
need to write scientific articles, not only
scientific articles
Second, Where are our children going  there are not
so many scientists. For example, if
we graduate, we graduate 40 bachelors approximately 15
m  We
take 2-3 people every year to graduate school. That is, it is a
pyramid such that very few
graduate students get to science. Is this too much or too few according to your
evaluations? Well, I and the audience dont
understand. Two or three people to graduate school, is it
cool?  this is not enough for Ukraine
in this specialty, so far it is
normal Considering that our department has
only been in existence for the second year, last year
we had two graduate students join us this
year, three graduate students Well, we will increase
it, it will not be dozens. That is, it is an artificial
product, each one is individual
the peculiarity of working with him individually
is that he has his own topic of research, this is non-mass
education, and this is education, working with each
specific postgraduate student who has his own
field of research and will have his own
achievements, this is a person who will already be
oriented to
winning in life, to some victories. And then,
in fact, with  of these graduate students
defending their dissertations, not all of them
remain in science there, too. And it also happens in the world
that some people
after completing graduate studies  go to develop
science and become professors, and the other
part go to an innovative company and become
top managers, create their own startups,
innovative startups that do not just
sell pies or do something there,
some kind of mass production
startup, she has now moved I open a
kiosk
here Yes, and ours open innovative
startups startups that are based
on all this knowledge and give the opportunity to
actually introduce artificial intelligence into
our life, now
a lot of such intelligent startups are
developing and our graduates are also
becoming such startups in the post that some
of your graduates are also
startups And what is the topic of his startup,
if possible  you know, yes, this definition is an
automatic definition of cuttings in forests, and
this startup is also related to it, they
cooperate with our
National Security and Defense Council of
Ukraine, and they are still analyzing whether
there is an official permit for this cutting, that is, whether this
cutting is legal or
illegal. Well  it's a start he gets
non-commercial, that is, he gets
it. Well, who is his client? I cant
understand. It turns out that he will sell this product. The
state gets it somehow from the
government. Yes, it turns out
that the community governments, which are also very often
found, for me, it
was a miracle. Now we have decentralization of the
community.  their disposal of a
certain piece of territory, they dont really
know whats there,
and thats why the
patriarchs even this intelligent planning
of community development
is necessary.
And here I am just as a person of business. Not
only that science is more business than
science, you can say that. I immediately evaluate
every startup who in  he will give money and
how the startup will sell itself, that is, that is
why it is possible to convince community leaders
that they should use
this information. So we also have a hard time
if. Well, to begin with, in every country, the
state or public administration is
served by a lot of commercial
companies that provide objective
information  where the state will take this
information to the
employees of the Ministry  They
will not analyze those fellings. Someone has
to provide information and it should be a state
system, but now literally this
month they launched a state register
of
farmers, where farmers register their fields,
show what they grow there and can
count on state support in
Europe, these are subsidies for that  that the crops we need are grown,
affected farmers can
apply for state support for
insurance and business development,
people
register in this register and through
it they can receive certain
compensations or payments, so one of the
important sources in this register is
satellite information Because everyone
can  to declare that he grew
some socially important crops there, namely,
in fact, he grew rapeseed or
sunflowers there, which will be sold better
because of that, and in Europe, all over the world, the state
controls all this and is controlled with the
help of satellites. The
inspector drives around the fields and looks through
binoculars.
probability  there is a human factor in corruption
because, let's say, the inspector cannot physically
go around, and secondly, you can meet with the
inspector there, negotiate there,
intimidate, bribe, and here the data is open, you
can't hide it, and let's say yes, it's interesting.
That is, everything is moving towards such automation.
I wished at the end of our conversation
for
those, for example, schoolchildren or
students who look at you like this and
may be interested in the topic of
data analysis from space satellites
that I would like to first of all, of course,
I would like to believe in myself and
want to develop a lot because if you put
before  If you set high goals for yourself, you will achieve them.
If you do not set them, it is
obvious that you will never achieve them
. Secondly, it is important to understand that this is a lot of
work, that is
, people who invested
in the study of mathematics and physics at school come to this field. They
have to study hard at first.
courses, I will say frankly that many
students drop out, there are those who
underestimate the fact that it is necessary to work
and worked  systemically, but the dividends
that then come, they greatly
exceed the possibilities, this is really a
social elevator that allows you to
earn with your own mind with your own
brains, regardless of how
much and whether you came from a well-off family
, from which geographical region you
came, very often students who
enter  from the regions of Kyiv,
they make their way and get better
results than those who were at the beginning in
better starting conditions, so in fact
it is very interesting and very powerful, that is,
in life it gives the opportunity to always find
a job and not only a job, but to find an
opportunity for self-realization
if I think  so who will watch us, I
will also leave it in the description under the video and maybe in the
contact, yes, how can you
contact the department if there are people, because it very
often happens that we did not even imagine
the
existence of some area, yes. And when we
get to know it, we can  to be so
engrossed and dusty, I know a
lot of examples Yes, when people
could simply be directed  And then they achieved
great, great success. Yes.
Thank you very much, Ms. Natalya, for agreeing to
meet because I believe that we
should promote science and promote the
intellectual sphere.
2 cm higher than he
jumped last time, and that's all
we have, dances,
songs, sports - it's very good, it's a part of
our life, but
because of the fact that science, intelligence, he is somewhere
in the shadow of a lot of people. They see.
They want to become a football player. Why?
Because with  on every screen they see a
football player, he is successful, they don't see a
successful scientist there, they don't see a
successful programmer there, and so on,
so thank you
very much.
why don't you close
scientific institutions to yourself? And post there on
Facebook, for example, I saw on Facebook
that there are really such cool things
x  akatons such data analysis, if you did
nt do this We didnt know about this so
much, thank you very much We are holding on, I think
Ukraine will win and you will continue to
focus not on the analysis of the military
these e-e influences But on the development yes
absolutely Thank you very much thank you
Goodbye To everything  fine